On the 24th of February, 1815, the watch-tower of Notre-Dame de la Garde signaled the three-master, the Pharaon, from Smyrna, Trieste, and Naples.
As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and, rounding the Chateau d'If, got on board the vessel between Cape Morgion and the Isle of Rion. Immediately, and as usual, the platform of Fort Saint Jean was covered with lookers-on; it is always a great event at Marseilles for a ship to come into port, especially when this ship, like the Pharaon, had been built, rigged, and laden on the stocks of the old Phocoea, and belonged to an owner of the city.
The ship drew on; she had safely passed the strait which some volcanic shock has made between the Isle of Calasareigne and the Isle of Jaros; had doubled Pomegue, and approached the harbor under topsails, jib, and foresail, but so slowly, and in so cheerless a manner, that the idlers, with that instinct which foresees misfortune, asked one another what accident could have happened on board. However, those experienced in navigation saw plainly that if any accident had occurred, it was not to the vessel herself, for she bore down with all the evidence of being skillfully handled, the anchor ready to be dropped, the bowsprit-shrouds loose, and beside the pilot who was steering the Pharaon through the narrow entrance of the port of Marseilles, was a young man, with rapid gestures and vigilant eye, who superintended every motion of the ship, and repeated each order of the pilot.
The vague disquietude which prevailed amongst the spectators had so much affected one of the crowd on the terrace of Saint Jean, that he did not await the arrival of the vessel in harbor, but, jumping into a small skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the Pharaon, which he reached as she rounded the creek of La Reserve.
When the young sailor saw this man approach, he left his station by the pilot, and came, hat in hand, to the side of the ship's bulwarks.
He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow, of from eighteen to twenty years, with beautiful black eyes, and hair like ebony; and his whole appearance bespoke that calmness and resolution peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle to contend with danger.
"Ah! is it you, Dantes?" cried the man in the skiff. "What's the matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?"
"A great misfortune, M. Morrel!" replied the young man,-"a great misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchia we lost our brave Captain Leclere."
"And the cargo!" inquired the owner, eagerly.
"Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on that head. But poor Captain Leclere--"
"What happened to him?" asked the owner, with an air of considerable relief. "What happened to the worthy captain?"
"He died."
"Fell into the sea?"
"No, sir; he died of the brain-fever, in dreadful agony."
Then, turning to the crew, he said:
"Look out there! all ready to drop anchor!"
All hands obeyed. At the same moment eight or ten seamen sprang some to the main-sheets, others to the braces, others to the halliards, others to the jib-ropes, and others to the topsail-brails.
The young sailor gave a look to see that his orders were promptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to the owner.
"And how did this misfortune occur?" inquired he, resuming the conversation suspended for a moment.
"Alas! sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long conversation with the harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly disturbed in his mind. At the end of twenty-four hours he was attacked by a fever, and died three days afterward. We performed the usual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in his hammock with two balls of thirty-six pounds each at his head and feet, off the island of El Giglio. We bring to his widow his sword and cross of honor. It was worth while, truly," added the young man with a melancholy smile, "to make war against the English for ten years, and to die at last, like everybody else, in his bed."
"Why, you see, Edmond," replied the owner, who appeared more comforted at every moment, "we are all mortal, and the old must make way for the young. If not, why, there would be no promotion; and as you have assured me that the cargo--"
"Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise you not to take 100,000 francs for the profits of the voyage."
Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young man shouted out:
"Ready, there, to lower topsails, foresail, and jib!"
The order was executed as promptly as if on board a man-of-war.
"Let go! and brail all!" At this last word all the sails were lowered, and the bark moved almost imperceptibly onward, advancing only under the impulse already given.
"Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel," said Dantes, observing the owner's impatience, "here is your supercargo, M. Danglars, coming out of his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me, I must look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning."
The owner did not wait to be twice invited. He seized a rope which Dantes flung to him, and, with an activity that would have done credit to a sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, whilst the young man, going to his task, left the conversation to the individual whom he had announced under the name of Danglars, who now coming out of the cabin advanced toward the owner. He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors, insolent to his inferiors; and then, besides his position as responsible agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors, he was as much disliked by the crew as Edmond Dantes was beloved by them.
"Well, M. Morrel," said Danglars, "you have heard of the misfortune that has befallen us?"
"Yes-yes! poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and an honest man!"
"And a first-rate seaman, above all, grown old between sky and ocean, as should a man charged with the interests of a house so important as that of Morrel and Son," replied Danglars.
"But," replied the owner, following with his look Dantes, who was watching the anchoring of his vessel, "it seems to me that a sailor needs not to be so old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business; for our friend Edmond there does his, it seems to me, like a man who has no need to ask instruction from any one."
"Yes," said Danglars, casting toward Edmond a look in which a feeling of hate was strongly visible. "Yes, he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. Scarcely was the captain's breath out of his body than he assumed the command without consulting any one, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the Isle of Elba, instead of making for Marseilles direct."
"As to taking the command of the vessel," replied Morrel, "that was his duty as first mate; as to losing a day and a half off the Isle of Elba, he was wrong, unless the ship wanted some repair."
"The ship was as well as I am, and as, I hope, you are, M. Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from pure whim, for the pleasure of going ashore, and nothing else."
"Dantes!" said the shipowner, tuning toward the young man, "come this way!"
"In a moment, sir," answered Dantes, "and I'm with you!"
Then, railing to the crew, he said, "Let go!"
The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling through the port-hole. Dantes continued at his post, in spite of the presence of the pilot, until this manoeuvre was completed, and then he added:
"Lower the pennant half-mast high; put the ensign in a weft, and slope the yards!"
"You see," said Danglars, "he fancies himself captain already, upon my word."
"And so, in fact, he is," said the owner.
"Except your signature and your partner's, M. Morrel."
"And why should he not have this?" asked the owner; "he is young, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, and of full experience."
A cloud passed over Danglars's brow.
"Your pardon, M. Morrel," said Dantes approaching; "the ship now rides at anchor, and I am at your service. You called me, I think?"
Danglars retreated a step or two.
"I wished to inquire why you stopped at the Isle of Elba."
"I do not know, sir; it was to fulfill a last instruction of Captain Leclere, who, when dying, gave me a packet for the Marechal Bertrand."
"Then, did you see him, Edmond?"
"Who?"
"The marechal."
"Yes."
Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantes on one side, he said suddenly-
"And how is the Emperor?"
"Very well, as far as I could judge from my eyes."
"You saw the Emperor, then?"
"He entered the marechal's apartment whilst I was there."
"And you spoke to him?"
"Why, it was he who spoke to me, sir," said Dantes, with a smile.
"And what did he say to you?"
"Asked me questions about the ship,-the time she left Marseilles, the course she had taken, and what was her cargo. I believe, if she had been in ballast, and I had been her master, he would have bought her. But I told him I was only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel and Son. 'Ah! ah!' he said, 'I know them! The Morrels have been shipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel who served in the same regiment with me when I was in garrison a Valence.'"
"Pardieu! and that is true!" cried the owner, greatly delighted. "And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was afterward a captain. Dantes, you must tell my uncle that the Emperor remembered him, and you will see it will bring tears into the old soldier's eyes. Come, come!"
continued he, patting Edmond's shoulder kindly, "you did very right, Dantes, to follow Captain Leclere's instruction, and touch at the Isle of Elba, although if it were known that you had conveyed a packet to the marechal, and had conversed with the Emperor, it might bring you into trouble."
"How could that bring me into trouble, sir?" asked Dantes; "for I did not even know of what I was the bearer; and the Emperor merely made such inquiries as he would of the first-comer. But, your pardon, here are the officers of health and the customs coming alongside. You will excuse me?"
"Certainly, certainly, my dear Dantes!"
The young man went to the gangway, and, as he departed, Danglars approached, and said-
"Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasons for his landing at Porto-Ferrajo?"
"Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars."
"Well, so much the better," said the supercargo; "for it is always painful to see a comrade who does not do his duty."
"Dantes has done his," replied the owner, "and there is nothing to say about it. It was Captain Leclere who gave orders for this delay."
"Talking of Captain Leclere, has not Dantes given you a letter from him?"
"To me?-no-was there one?"
"I believe that, besides the packet, Captain Leclere had confided a letter to his care."
"Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?"
"Why, that which Dantes left at Porto-Ferrajo."
"How do you know he had a packet to leave at Porto-Ferrajo?"
Danglars turned very red.
"I was passing close to the door of the captain's cabin, which was half-open, and I saw him give the packet and letter to Dantes."
"He did not speak to me of it," replied the shipowner; "but if there be any letter he will give it to me."
Danglars reflected for a moment.
"Then, M. Morrel, I beg of you," said he, "not to say a word to Dantes on the subject; I may have been mistaken."
At this moment the young man returned, and Danglars retreated.
"Well, my dear Dantes, are you now free?" inquired the owner.
"Yes, sir."
"You have not been long detained."
"No. I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our manifest; and as to the consignment, they sent a man off with the pilot, to whom I gave our papers."
"Then you have nothing more to do here?"
Dantes cast a glance around.
"No; all is arranged now."
"Then you can come and dine with me?"
"Excuse me, M. Morrel, excuse me, if you please; but my first visit is due to my father, though I am not the less grateful for the honor you have done me."
"Right, Dantes, quite right. I always knew you were a good son."